Hey guys welcome back to this course and this lecture we're going to talk about the free product but
pay for service business model.
So think back to the early days of where they were handing out those square things is to every merchant
that they can think of or get their hands on.
But they were giving it out to them for free because while they want those merchants to actually use
it and when they use it they would be able to charge a percentage of those transactions in order to
make back.
So for a business model like this you have some development costs that you've got to go through first.
You've got to pay for the product to get it out to these potential customers and then only some of them
will actually use it as a service that you can start charging a percentage of the transactions or charging
for.
So in this model we're going to look at something that is reminiscent of the early days of square or
with that business model looked like.
Let's take a look.
All right let's take a look at a quick sanity check for us.
So for a business model like this you're going to have to think about units that you're need to give
away for this free product.
Right.
You're going to give it away and it's going to cost you some money to manufacture or have it developed
and distributed.
It's going to cost you some money.
So for some pussy we're going to say if we give this many units away it's going to cost us this much
total.
OK so then are per cost to get a unit distributed in the hands of potential customers.
Is this much then of those that we distributed to some of them are going to actually use it.
So that's how many units that are going to be actually used.
And then of the ones that are use let's say this is for a pre payment processing device.
All right.
In the early years cost them that much to distributed.
And then of the ones that are being used this is how many transactions they use the process per year
per unit and the average transaction size is this much 18 bucks.
Right.
Then the service fee that's where they charge a percentage of the transaction total.
That's their service fee.
And in so we look at just this number here then.
So total number of transactions in a given year is the number of units with usage times the average
usage per unit for a year.
Right.
Then the transaction volume is going to be the transaction times the average transaction size.
So now that we have the total volume in the given year we have a transaction revenue from the fees which
will be the fee times the volume and then the revenue per unit with a usage.
So that's going to be the transaction revenue divided by the number of units.
So then the average revenue for each unit that's given out we develop the total units given out than
what we have that as well.
So this kind of gives you an idea of what your revenue numbers might look like.
You know if you have this kind of a business structure where you need to spend some money to create
and distribute it and get in the hands of people to use it.
But only some of them are going to use it enough for you to generate some revenue from those services.
Right.
Let's see what it looks like if we were to model this out.
So let's say we have this schedule where we want to try to give out 30000 units in the first year.
Okay but we're only able to efficiently give out 2500 units per month.
Okay.
So then we have this kind of schedule right.
Then the units in inventory at any given time.
First we're going to have just how many were coming in the order.
Right.
But then later in the following month is going to be what's in inventory minus what's been given out
plus anything that's coming in that month.
So then we have something that looks like this at any given time what our inventory looks like.
So it looks like we'll have 2500 left at the end of the year.
We'll you know be given out in that last month.
Okay.
Now we're going to be able to give out thirty thousand twenty five hundred per month.
Now the percentage these other assumptions are coming in from the front we're just going to keep them
as is.
So the active units that are added in any given month is going to be the percentage that uses it right
times the units that are given away that month.
So that's how many new units are added.
Okay that are activated that are being used and then the units in use in any given time which is the
cumulative one the first month is the same for the next month is the previous month plus the following
month.
So we kind of see what the cumulative number is now this column here I'm just doing some totals so that
we can see if we see that hey we added forty five hundred units total for the year.
And then here the cumulative number adds up to forty five hundred.
Then we know it's right.
All right then the average transactions per unit per month.
OK let's assume that each unit does 125 transactions per month.
So then the total transactions that are going to be processed is going to be the number of units in
use that month times the average number of transactions per unit.
Okay.
So that's going to be how many transactions are processed.
Now we need to make that a solid reference their absolute reference.
So then this these are the number of transactions process in any given month and the volume of the dollars
that's transacted is going to be the transactions times the average transaction volume.
And then if we have a 2 percent fee then the fee for any given month is pretty straightforward to calculate
as well right.
So we just have the fee times the transaction volume but we've got to fix the reference there and then
we have this total transaction volume.
So the cost of getting the units order and distributed now.
We didn't make any assumptions about what percentage of it the cost was you know the $15 was for the
order and in what was for the actual distribution for our purposes here let's just say everything's
paid for up front so we're going to just do that $15 times the units that were order.
Okay.
And because that's an expense we're going to make it negative and we'll do the same for the rest of
the year.
So then it gets paid when the order is.
So basically we're paying we're prepaying the ship the shipping or the distribution here.
But we just want it to delay when it gets to the customers based on the schedule here.
So then our actual cash balance is coming in right.
Is going to be the fees collected Plus the cash that needs to be spent.
So we see that you know we're going to be cash flow negative during the months when we have a big order
versus the months where we have some cash coming in.
And these are just going to be the cash balances in any of the given months right.
So we wanted to see something like Hey what's your maximum you know lowest cash flow rate.
And when do we actually get cash flow positive in terms of the account let's say like we're keeping
a cash account.
And then we can do this we can run the cumulative on that.
Right so initially we're going to be down that much.
But then the next month we're we're making some of that back.
Right.
And and so forth and what we can see is then we see that we kind of we get to the positive we get in
the black in month 6 and then after that we get to net positive here.
So if I take some of all of the cash flows here as equal to this right here at the end right.
Cumulative.
So here we have a simple model of something where you give it away and then you rely on their use and
you're charging for some sort of a percentage of the use right now.
You can layer on any of the other pricing models for your product.
It doesn't have to be this payment thing where you're paying covering you know a percentage of the transaction
fees and that's where you're charging could be something where you give it away and then they have a
certain number of uses and then they pay you for the use.
Right.
So we've done that with the other models.
You can kind of mix and match things to make it fit your particular situation.